So, hello, everyone.  I am very pleased to be here, very pleased to have been allowed to come along.  I am a database analyst.  I have been getting paid to play with computers for 18 years now.  I have been able to work on fun stuff from embedded systems to supercomputers.  I figured if I got a chance to come up and talk to you it would be to impart wisdom about database indexing, Rails developers you need to have imparted or some similar topic like that.  But when it came time to submit a proposal, there is another topic I am quite passionate about and that is cake decorating.  Now, really, I love my cakes.  But, look, I want it make it clear that I'm talking about depression.  It talks lots of people in different ways.  It affects people individually.  If I describe something that doesn't match up with what you are seeing what

that means is our experiences have been different.  It doesn't mean that what I'm describing doesn't necessarily apply to you.  I want to talk first of all about what it means to be depressed. We all have our ups and downs from time to time, but some downs last longer than others.  There is a definition that a major depressive episode is a period of at least two weeks during which you've spent most of every day feeling depressed.  And depression doesn't mean sad, they are not synonyms for each other.  There are checklists of symptoms across a whole range of areas, things that affect not only your feelings but things that can affect your behaviour, things that affect your thoughts, things that can affect you physically.  For example, enormous checklist, you can definitely be sad, right, you can be overwhelmed, irritable, indecisive, lacking in confidence.
You might have trouble concentrating.  You might find things that used to be fun just aren't fun any more.  You are doing something you know you should enjoy and you just don't.  You might stop going out, lose touch with friends, drinking more, less productive, can't sleep, loss of appetite, a whole range of things.  If you are feeling like this you are definitely not alone.  The Australian Bureau of Statistics conduct regularly a national health survey and in 2012 the number they came up with 13.6 per cent of the population are experiencing mental and behavioural conditions of which depression is the most common and anxiety was the second most common.
2.1 million people in this country alone, that number is going up.  It has gone up 4 per cent over the past decade.  There are 450 people in this room.  Have a look around and think how many
people right here are definitely statistically guaranteed to be going through this.  I know I have talked to people and that number is a low, because we are talking about a self-reporting survey,
when contacted they are willing to admit this is how I feel.  But no definition, no amount of
statistics can really prepare you for what it means to be depressed.  I want to tell you a story about how I first came to really understand what it means to be clinically depressed, to be
recognised and diagnosed as suffering from a severe depression.  The story is this.  When I was
19 I met a girl.  We met online, on IRC.  I am so old now that many people on IRC was kind of weird back then.  We did it before it was cool.  We were dating hipsters but it was the' 90s.  She was smart, she's funny.  We could and did talk for hours about anything.  We lived in the same city so we met up in real life and things progressed as they usually do.  Early on in our relationship, she had told me that she had been diagnosed with clinical depression.  Like everyone, she had her ups and downs.  We would talk our problems over with each other.  My natural impulse when somebody tells me about a problem is and want to solve that problem.  She would tell me how I'm feeling and I would say you know what you can do about this, try this, try that, some action she could take to change the situation or feel better about something.  I would try and help her take a step back, get some perspective and explain things aren't as bad as they seem and would get better.  Afterwards we would talk and problem solved.  I found it was
getting difficult for me to predict whether or not my perception of how that discussion had gone matched the reality.  Because there were days when I was convinced that we'd solved a problem, everything was great and I'd realised that nothing had changed, she was really down again and it was exactly the same problem.  We weren't having any impact on that.  There were times when I could look in her eyes and see that no matter what I said, no matter what she said, she simply couldn't believe that things were ever going to get any better.  She could tell me exactly why and how things were going to improve, from the plans that we had come up with together, but she couldn't actually believe it.  The point at which I knew I really understood, for the first time,
what was going on was she called me one night in tears and she told me that she had just tried to kill herself.  To cut a long story short, she ended up being committed for a short stay in the psych
ward at our local hospital.  I learned two very important lessons that day.  I finally understood
then what she meant when she said that she was clinically depressed.  It meant she couldn't talk her way out of that hole.  It didn't mean being sad, she was certainly capable of joy and moments of human and anyone I have met who has suffered depression has been the same.  It is not just sadness, depression, as a word, barely scratches the surface of what it means to feel this way.  We have all been depressed at some point, some of us for longer periods than others and many in ways that have had a concrete and negative impact on our relationships or lives.  But for most of us we can still imagine a light at the end of the tunnel, even if we can't quite see it yet.  We can hope that things are going to improve, things will get better.  To be clinically depressed is to lose that ability to hope for a brighter tomorrow.  We do have a word for that: Despair is the complete loss of absence of hope.  I think it is a better word to differentiate between depression and the
end point of that journey for a lot of people.  The other important lesson that I learned that day was that I truly understood what it meant to love someone.  It means taking the good with the
bad, for better or for worse, even when you know that that bad is definitely at the horizon coming
at you.  I knew for certain that I loved this girl and loving her meant accepting this is part of who she is.  A couple of years after that we were married.  We had our 13th wedding anniversary a couple of weeks ago.  And understanding despair was critical to the survival of our relationship,

but more importantly than that it is critical to the survival of my wife.  It is not something that is going to go away.  She can't get over it.  She can't just decide to feel better.  She suffers from a chronic illness.  Sometimes things get better, sometimes things get worse.  This is something that we have to deal with together through hard work, through vigilance.  And it is something we will have to continue dealing with for the rest of our lives.  It would be the same thing if my wife was a diabetic.  It is something we need to be constantly aware of and dangerous if left untreated.  It
is something she might need to take medication for every day.  What it is not is the kind of thing that we should have to hide.  It is not the kind of thing that anyone should be ashamed of.  We, as a community, are getting a lot better, I think about talking about depression and mental illness.
In the past few years it has been discussed much more often and openly than before.  We had, aside from me here today, there are talks at other conferences, one I need to watch, AlterConf
and impostor syndrome, that Josh talked about that all fit under an umbrella because sometimes it could be difficult to know where it fits into the story for an individual.  But I think many of us
are at a severe disadvantage when it comes to understanding depression, not only if we haven't experienced it ourselves but even if we have and we are going through it personally, as I
mentioned, my initial reaction to my girlfriend telling me about her problems is that I want to try to solve them, because that's what I do with problems, right, I love problems.  I love problems because you can break them down into smaller problems which are exactly like the problems you
started with now you've got more of them.  The fun part is when you make them small.  They stop being problems and we call them tasks or maybe we call them bugs or features.  Maybe we
decide it is not a problem we are worried about any more.  But this hyper deconstruction to
problem-solving in general is a pretty common reaction amongst this crowd I would be willing to bet.  For most of us it wouldn't be too inaccurate to swap the job title with problem solver, maybe
you are a lead architect, or a code wrangler or a DevOps ninja, we all solve problems on a daily
basis.  I had a client send me a business card, he wanted some cards and I said I don't have, and he said he can sort it out, and here is a language warning.  This is the only business card I have for some reason.  I don't give too many of these out for some reason... I got a lot spare, so if you want one, hey, they're free.  If the major powers of being able to break down problems and fix them with nothing more than the power of your mind, if that is a core part of your identity or job responsibility, it can make it really difficult to understand that there are some problems that can't
be solved just by thinking about them.  It makes it really difficult for people to recognise that sort of problem when the thing that you used to solve problems, your brain, and something that you are really good at doing, that's the thing that you are having a problem with.  I mean, what do we
do when we find a problem? As geeks and hackers, write code.  Depression, there are multiple
apps for that.  It is a great impulse to have.  We want to use or technical skills to solve.  This is mood scoper, a quantified self-help thing.  Smiling mind is a mindfulness meditation app.  A lot
of people find that sort of thing helpful, the introspection way to figure out where they are going.
But the impulse is not always constructive.  It can be destructive.  We get carried away thinking there is nothing we can't solve by writing code.  The Samaritan's radar app was well intentioned. They created it without thought for the real-world consequences.  It is an app that allows you to nominate the Twitter handle of a friend you might be worried out and it will go off and monitor their feed and alert you if they say things that it feels might indicate they are feeling depressed or suicidal.  But we live in a world that not everyone has that monitoring or best intentions at heart. Tools can help, but we can't necessarily code ourselves out of this kind of hole.  I have seen the pain and depression and helplessness in someone's eyes when they have run up against feelings they just can't think their way out of.  People who can look at a problem, break it down, figure out a plan to deal with it.  They can't bring themselves to believe that it is going to work.  It is like at some level they know that it won't work, no matter how much their rational mind can explain it, they've broken it down and dealt with it.  This kind of depression is almost like a knowledge that things can't get better.  I want to talk to those people and tell them that they're wrong.  I want to tell them before it is too late for them to hear and understand that message.
The first time I stood up in front of people to talk about this topic was a couple of years go at a blue hackers of Linux Conf.  The reason was a week before I had a phone call from a friend of
mine.  I'm going to call him Pete, because that's his name.  Pete had hit rock bottom.  I wish he
had called me earlier but I'm so grateful he called me when he did.  I had to take him into hospital, he is still with us today.  In fact, by freak chance we happen to be in Melbourne at the
same time.  He is up the back somewhere there.  I don't even remember the conversation that
saved Pete's life.  Some years beforehand I had said to Pete he should call me if he ever needed help.  When Pete was feeling so low he couldn't get lower, when he was convinced that nobody cared and nobody would be willing to help him, he remembered that conversation and he called the only person who had told him, "I care and I will help.  You should call me".  The human brain is still the most complicated machine that we know of.  On the one hand we are making

huge strides in decoding and understand how it works and on the other we are fuzzy on implementation details of key concept like consciousness and agency.  We do know it is
self-modifying code.  Enact of learning involves physical changes in the structure of your brain. I am hacking your web ware now.  You need to do it, but importantly for the people you love,
you need to perform a knowledge injection.  Some time years before, I had said to Pete that he should call me, and that information became part of a structure of his brain that was what it took
to make a difference and to save a life.  The single most important thing that you can do is talk to your friends and family, talk to your colleagues, tell them that you care, don't assume that they know how you feel.  Tell them explicitly and make sure when they are telling themselves that
nobody cares they have a chance of remembering that time when somebody said to them that they do.  If you ever find yourself in that hole, I want you to remember that you need to tell
someone, and reach out and ask for help.  When you tell someone to call you for help it doesn't mean you are putting up your hand to be their doctor or counsellor, you are putting up your hand
to call someone for them.  I will try to help you get professional help but I will remind you that you are not alone and someone does care.  As individuals, we can take these simple actions that
can improve lives, possibly even save the lives of people around us.  But we are more than individuals.  We are a community.  This isn't the first time this slide has been up.  Matz is nice and we are nice.  To have this kind of thing embedded as part of your culture is a privilege and
an opportunity.  It is a guide whenever you need to make a decision.  If all is more than one solution, pick the nicest one, right.  It is about compassion for people.  As a community, we
embrace diversity and even if we have a long way to go, I think we keep improving, we work to
continue to improve and part of that is recognising if you or the people you work with are affected by depression or mental illness then that is okay.  We each have an opportunity to make
our workplaces and our community one in which it is okay to be sick, it is okay to go and see a
professional when you need help.  I never really considered myself to be depressed.  I always thought of myself as a pretty cheerful kind of guy but I've been kind of guy, but I have been through bouts of depression.  I was able to do the thing I was encouraging my wife to do, take a step back, make plans, work on fixing it when I felt like that.  But I have got to tell you the past year in particular, for no reason I have been able to put my finger on has been the hardest ever. Josh talked about impostor syndrome, I have been doing it for a long time.  I have never felt less capable than in the past year.  It is easy when you know other people are in a worst place than you to think to yourself, get over yourself, other people have got it worse.  But while I was researching this talk, in fact last week I thought I should probably fill out a depression, anxiety checklist for myself, I have never done it before.  This what I came up with.  I scored in the highest category.  To be fair I scored at the bottom but it it was call to see your doctor if pain persists.  So I call to see the GP, he is busy, I am busy, I won't see him until I get back.  Maybe
there is nothing to worry about but if any other part of my body was sick I wouldn't hesitate to go see a doctor.  Why make exceptions for our minds.  As a community, I worked at Engine Yard, a
couple of years ago someone got up and spoke about how many want to make developer's lives
easier.  They want to make their work lives easier.  Maybe there is something we can do to make developer's whole lives easier.  They thought it is a great idea, they said go for it.  With generous support we managed to create something called Prompt, which is an organisation that aims from our community to get up on stage, like me today, and talk about this topic.  People who have been affected by depression, mental illness, check it out, prompt.energyyard.com.  You might be thinking someone you know, maybe yourself, someone in your life should get some help.  Help might mean opening up and talking about it.  It might mean counselling, lifestyle changes, medication or some combination all of the above.  Beyond Blue here in Australia is good place
to start, try the anxiety and depression checklist.  Blue Hackers is another great source of the community, who are affected and want to share their experiences and their approaches to dealing
with each other.  But I want to remind you of the single most important thing that I would like
you to take away from this talk and that is to tell someone you care about them and they can call you if they ever need help.  Please don't put it off.  I want you to do it today, when you leave here today, give someone a call, drop in on a friend.  The last thing I want you to remember is that
you don't need to wait for that call.  If you know you need help, you can tell someone if you need help.  If it is not an emergency call your GP, call a friend.  If you need immediate help call
Lifeline, call 000 if you have to.  If you want to chat, talk to me, I will listen and find a professional for you to talk to.  I want to thank the organisers for having me here today.  It is a
topic that is important to me.  I think it is important to all of us and I am glad that they were in agreement with that.  I am really grateful.  I want to thank Engine-yard and Prompt.  I want to
thank you for being here to listen.  Thank you.
