Hi.  I'm really excited to be here.  I love Australia, love Melbourne.  It is completely fantastic city.  I guess if I have one complaint it is that I haven't been able to find any truly Australian beer yet.  Have been looking for Foster's but I can't find any.  If you can help me out after.  I am Sean.  We are going to be talking about how I am saving the world with Ruby. But before I get started I want to give a shout-out to the best community out there, Ruby.  We have the jobs we do because of free work, all the open source people out there that are contributing, so we have jobs we love, which is fantastic.  A shout -out to Sandy Matz in San Diego in November, and I told her I was coming here and she said I'll be great.  She is just the nicest person in the world.  Two hours later she came up and gave me these, a WWW, SMD.
She had time to run out and get what would Sean Marcia stickers made.  My talk, I am going to give you a history of the project and tell you about technology and tell you how you can get
involved in more things.  But mostly I am going to tell you a story about bees.  My story with
bees began when I was six years old.  For reference, this is me at 6.  I love that sweater.  Back when I was 6 my best friend and I were out wandering and found a wild beehive.  If you know
six-year-old boys you can guess what we did.  Yes, we started throwing rocks at it.  For whatever reason, my good friend got stung a few dozen times but the bees left me alone.  I feel like I owe
them a karmic debt now for not stinging me.  Jumping forward to today, I work at university and

I was wandering across campus one day and I saw this gentleman giving a talk, this is Jarman Prior, and he was talking about Amazonian honeybees.  I sat down with him after his talk because it was interesting and he told me interesting things abouts bees.  If you take nothing away from my talk, in case you are on Jeopardy, they are crazy workers, they live for six weeks in honey-gathering stages, if not and it is the winter they live three to six months.  One bee can visit 50,000 flowers and will gather 1/12th of a teaspoon of honey.  Over 90 per cent of all wild flowers and plants are pollinated bees.  I think 65 per cent of our food is because of bees, they pollinate the food we eat or the food we eat.  But the bees are dying and it is really serious.  In North America about 45 per cent of bees have died out, they have someone looking after them. Wild bees is even more serious.  In some areas, 90 per cent of them.  In the state where I am working it is about 67 per cent of the bees have died.  In the United Kingdom they are predicting by 2018 there are not going to be any bees left.  Europe, Asia, India, it is particularly scary in India because of all their pollination happens because of the wild undomesticatable honeybee
and it is the wild bees getting hit the hardest.  It is scary.  It is thankfully starting to pick up in the news, NetFlix, if you got it here you can see there is documentaries out there and Time Magazines and it is covered.  So Jarman is studying the collapse of the colony.  Here are some of the possible causes.  I have one of my own theories in there but it is not catching on in the beekeeping community, but I have faith it will.  Pesticides, mites, genetic factors, they don't know.  I did research, this is Australian honeybees.  I don't feel bad about the Foster's.  I asked him what to do to help.  He had a wish list and needed money, and Mark Zuckerberg or someone I can call up, and it is not an option.  The second thing he wanted to monitor beehives, so I can
do that.  He had one at George Mason University on the top of the parking garage, you can see them on the fifth or sixth floor.  Why he wanted it, he wanted insights into the temperature of the
hive and the weight and the outside temperature and weight, obviously, because you should see
the weight of a beehive lineally going up over the course of the year.  The cool thing about bees, they keep the internal temperature the exact temperature the year round, doesn't matter whether it is the middle of summer or winter.  When they pull out beehives, the honeycomb, in the past they assumed the unfilled combs in the hive was because the bees hadn't filled them up, but it turns
out there is a bee breaking its wings off and generating heat all day, it is a crappy life but someone has got to do it.  Similarly, they have bees that they'll take heat and they'll absorb it into their body and take it elsewhere and dissipate it.  They know this because some scientists, they applied heat to the hive and watched the bees do that.  I should say, some jerk scientists applied heat to a hive and watched them do that.  He watched the outside temperature and controlled, if you don't see the weight going up, perhaps, it is because it has been snowing or raining or something like that.  So they kept looking at the hives up there in the sixth floor.  We can see some problems, I guess, open to the elements.  There isn't any power, we had a really low
budget.  I think we had $175 to start.  We needed something that was really simple to maintain and repair and cheap.  So starting with the no power, this was the low hanging fruit of it all.  We
just, I solved that by going out and getting solar panel and deep-cell battery and that was that.
Now with a limited budget, that was, again, solved by, I used Raspberry pies because most people have them at home, because they buy them, they think they're going to do a project and then they don't use them so I just asked all my friends who has a Raspberry pie to save the bees and they thought it was cool.  My value added to the project was this MacGyver-like ability to solve problems.  If I can give you an example like that, when we were putting our initial probe into the hive, we realised it was a cheaply made probe, so we had to protect the probe.  So me racking my brain, what can I do? I ran to the campus health services and asked for a handful of condoms and thought I will wrap it in a condom and put it in the hive.  It only occurred to me after that the people on the campus health services have probably seen things that I haven't even imagine.  Because I had been outdoors all day and dirty when I walked in there, I was carrying duct tape and rope and I asked for a handful of condoms and they didn't even flinch.  So the things they've seen.  I realised you guys might not know who MacGyver is, it is a North American thing.  This is MacGyver in three slides.  So, I didn't - it wasn't perfect but I have a start.  So since I have a little server running, this little Raspberry pie I might throw in Twitter, social media, we have the bees tweeting the camera is off, the temperature censor wasn't correctly placed because the temperature should be higher than that and it is a start.  It is kind of
interesting, when you are on social media and tweeting from a university account, people assume you are an expert, I guess. Because as soon as we tweeted it out, within a day someone sent us a message, "how do I get my dog to stop eating bees?" "Let him eat some bees."  But so you know, I Google it and it turns out lots of dogs like to eat bees, little dogs, medium-sized dogs, and big dogs.  So, who has been in the Ruby community long enough to know this acronym? I see a few hands. This was started by Brian Lyalls, you might see this on shirts, and it stands for "test all
the something time", I forget what the F stands for.  But no offence to Brian, he is wrong.  What

the acronym should be is "try awesome things, forget testing".  And because if you forget testing, stuff like this happens.  And now you are thinking why is that a good thing? Well, people find it funny when a beehive is tweeting and it is 500 degrees and you can see people asking if we are breeding fire bees.  But it turned out to be this really great thing, it created a social media buzz... because we were getting retweeted and the city of Virginia is retweeting us and all different organisations, everything started happening for us.  It brought us to the attention of the Sweet Virginia organisation, a non-profit who teach about bees and honeybee education and they reached out to us because they needed help.  They didn't have money but they had land all over the state we could have access to.  Jarman wanted to teach a class of researchers about this and we just had to raise money.  We started an Indigo campaign and raised $12 ,000, not 10, so we were able to have a class of 12 students.  They opened the class up.  It filled up in less than an hour and 168 people on the waiting list, just wanting to help.  But again, this really led to another social media explosion for us, like the kick-starter campaign, the social media and all of campus became aware of us.  One of the fraternities started a bee logo.  The university magazine was all about the bees and then this gentleman, that is the president of the university, when the president gets involved we get a budget.  With that budget Jarman went and travelled around, he started some other programs he was really interested in, including travelling around Central America
and South America teaching beekeeping and sustainability and programs to indigenous people to help them with income and whatnot.  It has been wildly successful, which is fantastic.  But now let's get to the interesting stuff, the technology.  Raspberry pies, not pies.  That is important
because when you tell your coworkers you will be working with Raspberry pies they
mysteriously start showing up at your office with a different idea in your head.  If you are not familiar with it, that is what it is.  A credit-card size computer.  I just can't have this, I need a
banana to show you the scale.  Raspberry pies have GPI, OPens if you are thinking about a
similar project, and if you opened up a desktop computer and looked at the back, this is what it looks like.  This is the three gems I would recommend you start playing with in this order.  Now with the Ruby, it is powered by Ruby and Sinatra, not Rails, I didn't want to explain spitting out JSON and all the Rails things people just don't need.  So actually, I just ended up going with the dashing gem, if you are not familiar, dashing is a way of creating dashboards, you can create a project and this was our dashboard.  You go within range of a beehive and connect to it wirelessly and check the stats.  How it is powered, with three chron, it is a UNIX utility that runs something on a schedule.  You have probably seen one is a python script, because it came with a scale and we didn't want to bother rewriting it.  This is all the code it takes to grab the temperature and humidity readings.  Just grab a bit of - make them into a CSV file and put them in the public folder to keep it simple so the researchers when they go to the hive and if they want
the data they can type in the CSV file.  And the python code, if anyone cares.  So the other things I used, I used passenger as a web server and a couple of Linux passages and wireless access point and wireless, I hope everyone thinks that was pretty simple.  I think it is so simple that anyone in this room could do it.  I want everyone here to do something like this, because I think we are all amazing.  We kind of get into this silicon valley, ivory tower mindset where we have to get our cuing speeds down by 0.8 of a second and argue over using haripins or composition but the rest
of the world doesn't live in the Silicon Valley mindset.  I work in a university and I see people solving problems by mailing Excel files and Word documents and I think educators need our help.  At least in America, maybe you fully fund your schools here, but it is super easy to get involved.  Pick something that interests you.  For me, I worked with a professor doing wine and research, working with a bee professor and Pompeii.  But it is easy, most universities publish a schedule of talks, find a professor and talk to them.  Even though they are PhDs, they are happy to talk.  They love to talk about themselves.  And they need our help.  And I know right now you are thinking, come on, Sean, are all you Canadians socialists? What's in it for me? I already give back.  Well, I run a boot-up group in North America, probably the best in North America, so probably the best in the world, and Rubyists have the same question it seems, they all have this
goal that they want to achieve but they just can't get out.  They want it, but what that goal is, they want to get involved in open source.  They just don't know how.  By doing things like this, it is
an easy gateway into open source.  You can get a project.  There is a lot of intangible benefits
like Nick with the bee pun, like I hear bee puns every day.  Depending on your project you might not hear bee puns but you learn a lot of interesting things.  I didn't know anything about bees
before I started this project.  You talk to people, it is fun.  If it is the kind of thing that does
interest you and you think I would like to get involved in something like this, I would like to invite you to come to Ruby for Goodness.  It is a conference, we stay in the university dorms, we think of animal shelters, boys and girls clubs, basically the people who need people like you and me, our skills, but can't afford us.  The projects are generally just simple carve-outs but they need our help.  This is a world full of love because it is embracing Ruby.  Our GW in the bottom is our

shout-out to him because we lost him.  Finally the reason we do it, because the Ruby group, we make 8-bit stickers, we are nice, so I would invite you to come find me after and get a sticker if you would like one.  That's all.  Thank you so much for your time.
